.\" audioctl.1 -- manual page for the audiod user control tool
.\" Copyright 2026 Ioannis Anagnostakis
.\" Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0
.TH AUDIOCTL 1 "2026-01-01" "audiod 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
audioctl \- control your own PipeWire audio stack, and the optional audio hub
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B audioctl
.RI [ status | start | stop | restart " [" component ]]
.br
.B audioctl hub
.RI { status | scan " [" seconds ]| pair " [" seconds ]| reconnect |\
play | pause | next | prev | combine " [" off ]| net }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B audioctl
is the unprivileged companion to
.BR audiod (8).
It lets any user inspect and manage
.I their own
PipeWire stack (pipewire, wireplumber, pipewire\-pulse) without root and
without logging out, wrapping the same libslack
.BR daemon (1)
supervisors that
.B audiod
uses.
.PP
It honours the same audio\-server gate as
.BR audiod (8):
if the system is configured for PulseAudio, or
.B AUDIO_SERVER=pulse
is set, it declines and does nothing.
.PP
The
.B hub
subcommand drives the optional party audio hub (Bluetooth speaker, combine
output, network audio, media control). It is only meaningful when
.B HUB_MODE=yes
in
.I /etc/audiod/audiod.conf
and the invoking user is a member of the hub group (default
.BR audiohub ).
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Stack control
.TP
.B status
Show the state of your session bus and the three audio services.
.TP
.B start
Start the stack in dependency order (pipewire, then wireplumber, then
pipewire\-pulse), each behind a readiness gate.
.TP
.B stop
Stop the stack, targeted by name.
.TP
.BR restart " [" \fIcomponent\fR ]
Restart the whole stack, or a single named component (for example
.BR wireplumber ).
.SS Hub control
.TP
.B hub status
Show hub mode, your group membership, whether you are the current owner, and
the state of Bluetooth, network audio, and combine.
.TP
.BR "hub scan" " [" \fIseconds\fR ]
Scan for nearby Bluetooth devices (speakers and phones) for
.I seconds
(default 8), print a numbered list annotated with each device's state
.RB ( connected ,
.BR paired ,
.BR new ),
and connect the one you pick by number. Choosing an already\-connected device
offers to disconnect it instead (confirm by typing
.BR yes ).
Only devices that are actively advertising appear.
.TP
.BR "hub pair" " [" \fIseconds\fR ]
Open a bounded, on\-demand pairing window (default 120s) during which the box
is discoverable. Pairing still requires the normal BlueZ PIN/confirmation;
there is no auto\-accept.
.TP
.B hub reconnect
Reconnect paired Bluetooth device(s) to you. Manual recovery after a device
was lost (for example following a VT switch).
.TP
.BR "hub play" | pause | next | prev
Send an AVRCP media command to the connected phone, so you can control
playback from the keyboard.
.TP
.BR "hub combine" " [" off ]
Create a
.B hub_combined
sink that mirrors playback to several outputs at once (built\-in speakers,
every HDMI output, and any Bluetooth speaker) and make it the default; with
.B off
remove it and restore a normal default sink.
.TP
.B hub net
(Re)apply the network\-audio configuration. This is deny\-by\-default: it does
nothing unless
.B NET_TCP=yes
and an explicit
.B NET_ACL
allow\-list are set.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/audiod/audiod.conf
Configuration, including the hub keys
.RB ( HUB_MODE ,
.BR HUB_GROUP ,
.BR HUB_OWNER ,
.BR HUB_BT_AUTORESUME ,
.BR HUB_BT_AUTOPLAY ,
.BR COMBINE ,
.BR COMBINE_SLAVES ,
.BR NET_TCP ,
.BR NET_ACL ,
.BR NET_PORT ).
.TP
.I /etc/audiod/stack.conf
The ordered service list.
.TP
.I ~/.run/*.pid
Per\-user pidfiles for the supervised services.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success and non\-zero if a requested action fails (for example an
out\-of\-range scan selection, or a failed Bluetooth connect).
.SH EXAMPLES
Restart a stuck audio stack without logging out:
.PP
.RS
.EX
audioctl restart
.EE
.RE
.PP
Scan for and connect a Bluetooth speaker from the terminal:
.PP
.RS
.EX
audioctl hub scan 15
.EE
.RE
.PP
Play the same music on all outputs at once:
.PP
.RS
.EX
audioctl hub combine
.EE
.RE
.SH SECURITY
Bluetooth pairing is bounded and PIN\-gated; the box is never left permanently
discoverable. Network audio is deny\-by\-default and requires an explicit
allow\-list; clients allowed in can also see that user's microphone and
monitors, so only trusted machines should be listed. Only members of the hub
group can use hub features.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR audiod (8),
.BR daemon (1),
.BR bluetoothctl (1),
.BR wpctl (1),
.BR pactl (1),
.BR loginctl (1)
.PP
Full documentation:
.I /usr/doc/audiod\-0.2.0/README.md
and
.IR GAMER\-GUIDE.md .
.SH AUTHOR
Ioannis Anagnostakis, 2026.
.SH LICENSE
Apache License, Version 2.0.
