.\" audiod.8 -- manual page for the audiod session-manager daemon
.\" Copyright 2026 Ioannis Anagnostakis
.\" Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0
.TH AUDIOD 8 "2026-01-01" "audiod 0.2.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
audiod \- elogind\-driven per\-user audio session manager for Slackware
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/sbin/audiod
.PP
.B /etc/rc.d/rc.audiod
.RI { start | stop | restart | status }
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B audiod
is a per\-user audio session manager for non\-systemd Slackware. It gives the
PipeWire stack the ordered startup, readiness gating, per\-user lifecycle, and
clean teardown that
.B systemd \-\-user
provides elsewhere, built entirely from elogind, libslack
.BR daemon (1),
and shell. elogind is used unmodified.
.PP
It watches elogind's
.B org.freedesktop.login1
D\-Bus interface for
.B UserNew
and
.B UserRemoved
signals. Because elogind reference\-counts a user's sessions,
.B UserNew
fires only on a user's first login and
.B UserRemoved
only on their last logout. On first login
.B audiod
starts
.BR pipewire ,
waits for its socket to appear, then starts
.B wireplumber
and
.BR pipewire\-pulse ,
each under a
.B daemon \-rB
supervisor. On last logout it tears the stack down, targeted by name. This
fixes the long\-standing race where the stock scripts start dependent daemons
before the PipeWire core is ready, causing delayed or muted audio.
.PP
.B audiod
runs as a foreground root reactor. On start it reconciles users already
logged in, then follows login1 signals via
.BR "gdbus monitor" ,
reconnecting if the stream drops. Services are launched as the target user via
.B setpriv
with a clean environment, so no second elogind session is opened.
.SH OPTIONAL HUB MODE
When
.B HUB_MODE=yes
in
.IR /etc/audiod/audiod.conf ,
.B audiod
also runs an optional hub extension (sourced from
.IR /usr/libexec/audiod/hub.sh )
that turns the machine into a party audio hub: Bluetooth phones play through
the box, playback can mirror to several outputs, and trusted LAN machines can
stream in. Hub features are restricted to members of the hub group (default
.BR audiohub ).
The first hub member to log in becomes the owner of the shared sound card and
Bluetooth adapter; a per\-owner watcher
.RI ( hub\-btwatch.sh )
stops Bluetooth cleanly across VT switches to prevent a speaker drone. With
.B HUB_MODE=no
(the default) none of this runs and behaviour is identical to the plain
session manager. See
.BR audioctl (1)
for the user\-facing hub commands.
.SH GATING
A login is served only if elogind reports it as seated
.RB ( Seat
non\-empty),
.BR Class=user ,
and
.BR Remote=no .
Remote and greeter sessions are ignored. If the system is set to PulseAudio,
or
.B AUDIO_SERVER=pulse
is configured,
.B audiod
stands down entirely.
.SH ENABLING
.B audiod
changes how PipeWire starts, so the stock autostart must be disabled first
(this does not switch to PulseAudio):
.PP
.RS
.EX
/usr/sbin/audiod\-takeover.sh
.EE
.RE
.PP
Then enable the service so it starts after elogind:
.PP
.RS
.EX
chmod +x /etc/rc.d/rc.audiod
# in /etc/rc.d/rc.local, after elogind:
[ \-x /etc/rc.d/rc.audiod ] && /etc/rc.d/rc.audiod start
.EE
.RE
.PP
To restore the stock start mechanism, run
.BR audiod\-restore.sh .
Note that upgrading the
.B pipewire
package may re\-enable the stock
.IR profile.d/pipewire.sh ;
re\-run
.B audiod\-takeover.sh
if needed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/sbin/audiod
The reactor.
.TP
.I /usr/bin/audioctl
User control tool; see
.BR audioctl (1).
.TP
.I /usr/libexec/audiod/audiod\-lib.sh
Shared logic (gate, detection, stack ops).
.TP
.I /usr/libexec/audiod/hub.sh
Optional hub logic (sourced; inert unless HUB_MODE=yes).
.TP
.I /usr/libexec/audiod/hub\-btwatch.sh
Per\-owner Bluetooth VT\-switch watcher.
.TP
.I /etc/audiod/audiod.conf
Configuration.
.TP
.I /etc/audiod/stack.conf
Ordered service list.
.TP
.I /etc/rc.d/rc.audiod
Init script (mode 0644 = off until enabled).
.TP
.I /run/audiod.pid
Reactor pidfile.
.TP
.I /run/audiod\-hub\-owner
Hub owner state (cleared on reboot).
.SH CONFIGURATION
Key settings in
.IR /etc/audiod/audiod.conf :
.B AUDIO_SERVER
(auto/pipewire/pulse),
.B MANAGE_DBUS
(spawn a session bus for bus\-less logins),
.BR BUS_WAIT ,
.BR SEAT_WAIT ,
.BR PIPEWIRE_WAIT ,
.BR DEBUG .
Hub keys:
.BR HUB_MODE ,
.BR HUB_GROUP ,
.BR HUB_OWNER ,
.BR HUB_BT_AUTORESUME ,
.BR HUB_BT_AUTOPLAY ,
.BR COMBINE ,
.BR COMBINE_SLAVES ,
.BR NET_TCP ,
.BR NET_ACL ,
.BR NET_PORT .
.SH REQUIREMENTS
elogind exposing the login1 interface; psmisc
.RB ( fuser );
libslack
.BR daemon (1);
PipeWire; and
.B pam_elogind
in the login PAM stack. Hub mode additionally needs
.B bluez
with
.B bluetoothd
running.
.SH LIMITATIONS
Two different local users cannot share one sound card at once (a kernel/ALSA
limit, identical under systemd); the inactive session falls back to Dummy
Output. Kernel\-level device enumeration delays are outside its control. For
cross\-user sharing over the network, see the separate
.B audioshare
project.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR audioctl (1),
.BR daemon (1),
.BR elogind (8),
.BR loginctl (1),
.BR setpriv (1),
.BR pipewire (1),
.BR wireplumber (1)
.PP
Full documentation:
.IR /usr/doc/audiod\-0.2.0/README.md .
.SH AUTHOR
Ioannis Anagnostakis, 2026.
.SH LICENSE
Apache License, Version 2.0.
